6.824 2022 Lecture 7: Raft (2)

*** topic: the Raft log (Lab 2B)

as long as the leader stays up:
  clients only interact with the leader
  clients don't see follower states or logs

things get interesting when changing leaders
  e.g. after the old leader fails
  how to change leaders without anomalies?
    diverging replicas, missing operations, repeated operations, &c

what do we want to ensure?
  if any server executes a given command in a log entry,
    then no server executes something else for that log entry
  (Figure 3's State Machine Safety)
  why? if the servers disagree on the operations, then a
    change of leader might change the client-visible state,
    which violates our goal of mimicing a single server.
  example:
    S1: put(k1,1) | put(k1,2) 
    S2: put(k1,1) | put(k2,3) 
    can't allow both to execute their 2nd log entries!

how can logs disagree?
  a leader crashes before sending AppendEntries to all
    S1: 3
    S2: 3 3
    S3: 3 3
  (the 3s are the term number in the log entry)
  worse: logs might have different commands in same entry!
    after a series of leader crashes, e.g.
        10 11 12 13  <- log entry #
    S1:  3
    S2:  3  3  4
    S3:  3  3  5

Raft forces agreement by having followers adopt new leader's log
  example:
  S3 is chosen as new leader for term 6
  S3 wants to append a new log entry at index 13
  S3 sends an AppendEntries RPC to all
     prevLogIndex=12
     prevLogTerm=5
  S2 replies false (AppendEntries step 2)
  S3 decrements nextIndex[S2] to 12
  S3 sends AppendEntries w/ entries 12+13, prevLogIndex=11, prevLogTerm=3
  S2 deletes its entry 12 (AppendEntries step 3)
    and appends new entries 12+13
  similar story for S1, but S3 has to back up one farther

the result of roll-back:
  each live follower deletes tail of log that differs from leader
  then each live follower accepts leader's entries after that point
  now followers' logs are identical to leader's log

Q: why was it OK to forget about S2's index=12 term=4 entry?

could new leader roll back *committed* entries from end of previous term?
  i.e. could a committed entry be missing from the new leader's log?
  this would be a disaster -- old leader might have already said "yes" to a client
  so: Raft needs to ensure elected leader has all committed log entries

why not elect the server with the longest log as leader?
  in the hope of guaranteeing that a committed entry is never rolled back
  example:
    S1: 5 6 7
    S2: 5 8
    S3: 5 8
  first, could this scenario happen? how?
    S1 leader in term 6; crash+reboot; leader in term 7; crash and stay down
      both times it crashed after only appending to its own log
    Q: after S1 crashes in term 7, why won't S2/S3 choose 6 as next term?
    next term will be 8, since at least one of S2/S3 learned of 7 while voting
    S2 leader in term 8, only S2+S3 alive, then crash
  all peers reboot
  who should be next leader?
    S1 has longest log, but entry 8 could have committed !!!
    so new leader can only be one of S2 or S3
    so the rule cannot be simply "longest log"

end of 5.4.1 explains the "election restriction"
  RequestVote handler only votes for candidate who is "at least as up to date":
    candidate has higher term in last log entry, or
    candidate has same last term and same length or longer log
  so:
    S2 and S3 won't vote for S1
    S2 and S3 will vote for each other
  so only S2 or S3 can be leader, will force S1 to discard 6,7
    ok since 6,7 not on majority -> not committed -> reply never sent to clients
    -> clients will resend the discarded commands

the point:
  "at least as up to date" rule ensures new leader's log contains
    all potentially committed entries
  so new leader won't roll back any committed operation

The Question (from last lecture)
  figure 7, top server is dead; which can be elected?

who could become leader in figure 7? (with top server dead)
  need 4 votes to become leader
  a: yes -- a, b, e, f
  b: no -- b, f
    e has same last term, but its log is longer
  c: yes -- a, b, c, e, f
  d: yes -- a, b, c, d, e, f
  e: no -- b, f
  f: no -- f

why won't d prevent a from becoming leader?
  after all, d's log has higher term than a's log
  a does not need d's vote in order to get a majority
  a does not even need to wait for d's vote

why is Figure 7 analysis important?
  choice of leader determines which entries are preserved vs discarded
  critical: if service responded positively to a client,
    it is promising not to forget!
  must be conservative: if client *could* have seen a "yes",
    leader change *must* preserve that log entry.
    Election Restriction does this via majority intersection.
  why OK to discard e's last 4,4?
  why OK to (perhaps) preserve c's last 6?
    could client have seen a "yes" for them?

"a committed operation" has two meanings in 6.824:
  1) the op cannot be lost, even due to (allowable) failures.
     in Raft: when a majority of servers persist it in their logs.
     this is the "commit point" (though see Figure 8).
  2) the system knows the op is committed.
     in Raft: leader saw a majority.

again:
  we cannot reply "yes" to client before commit.
  we cannot forget an operation that may have been committed.
      
how to roll back quickly
  the Figure 2 design backs up one entry per RPC -- slow!
  lab tester may require faster roll-back
  paper outlines a scheme towards end of Section 5.3
    no details; here's my guess; better schemes are possible
      Case 1      Case 2       Case 3
  S1: 4 5 5       4 4 4        4
  S2: 4 6 6 6 or  4 6 6 6  or  4 6 6 6
  S2 is leader for term 6, S1 comes back to life, S2 sends AE for last 6
    AE has prevLogTerm=6
  rejection from S1 includes:
    XTerm:  term in the conflicting entry (if any)
    XIndex: index of first entry with that term (if any)
    XLen:   log length
  Case 1 (leader doesn't have XTerm):
    nextIndex = XIndex
  Case 2 (leader has XTerm):
    nextIndex = leader's last entry for XTerm
  Case 3 (follower's log is too short):
    nextIndex = XLen

*** topic: persistence (Lab 2C)

what would we like to happen after a server crashes?
  Raft can continue with one missing server
    but failed server must be repaired soon to avoid dipping below a majority
  two repair strategies:
  * replace with a fresh (empty) server
    requires transfer of entire log (or snapshot) to new server (slow)
    we must support this, in case failure is permanent
  * or reboot crashed server, re-join with state intact, catch up
    requires state that persists across crashes
    we must support this, for simultaneous power failure
  let's talk about the second strategy -- persistence

if a server crashes and restarts, what must Raft remember?
  Figure 2 lists "persistent state":
    log[], currentTerm, votedFor
  a Raft server can only re-join after restart if these are intact
  thus it must save them to non-volatile storage
    non-volatile = disk, SSD, battery-backed RAM, &c
    save after each point in code that changes non-volatile state
    or before sending any RPC or RPC reply
  why log[]?
    if a server was in leader's majority for committing an entry,
      must remember entry despite reboot, so next leader's
      vote majority includes the entry, so Election Restriction ensures
      new leader also has the entry.
  why votedFor?
    to prevent a client from voting for one candidate, then reboot,
      then vote for a different candidate in the same term
    could lead to two leaders for the same term
  why currentTerm?
    avoid following a superseded leader.
    avoid voting in a superseded election.

some Raft state is volatile
  commitIndex, lastApplied, next/matchIndex[]
  why is it OK not to save these?

persistence is often the bottleneck for performance
  a hard disk write takes 10 ms, SSD write takes 0.1 ms
  so persistence limits us to 100 to 10,000 ops/second
  (the other potential bottleneck is RPC, which takes << 1 ms on a LAN)
  lots of tricks to cope with slowness of persistence:
    batch many new log entries per disk write
    persist to battery-backed RAM, not disk
    be lazy and risk loss of last few committed updates

how does the service (e.g. k/v server) recover its state after a crash+reboot?
  easy approach: start with empty state, re-play Raft's entire persisted log
    lastApplied is volatile and starts at zero, so you may need no extra code!
    this is what Figure 2 does
  but re-play will be too slow for a long-lived system
  faster: use Raft snapshot and replay just the tail of the log

*** topic: log compaction and Snapshots (Lab 2D)

problem:
  log will get to be huge -- much larger than state-machine state!
  will take a long time to re-play on reboot or send to a new server

luckily:
  a server doesn't need *both* the complete log *and* the service state
    the executed part of the log is captured in the state
    clients only see the state, not the log
  service state usually much smaller, so let's keep just that

what log entries *can't* a server discard?
  committed but not yet executed
  not yet known if committed

solution: service periodically creates persistent "snapshot"
  [diagram: service state, snapshot on disk, raft log (in mem, on disk)]
  copy of service state as of execution of a specific log entry.
    e.g. k/v table.
  service hands snapshot to Raft, with last included log index.
  Raft persists its state and the snapshot.
  Raft then discards log before snapshot index.
  every server snapshots (not just the leader).

what happens on crash+restart?
  service reads snapshot from disk
  Raft reads persisted log from disk
  Raft sets lastApplied to snapshot's last included index
    to avoid re-applying already-applied log entries

problem: what if follower's log ends before leader's log starts?
  because follower was offline and leader discarded early part of log
  nextIndex[i] will back up to start of leader's log
  so leader can't repair that follower with AppendEntries RPCs
  thus the InstallSnapshot RPC

philosophical note:
  state is often equivalent to operation history
  one or the other may be better to store or communicate
  we'll see examples of this duality later in the course

practical notes:
  Raft's snapshot scheme is reasonable if the state is small
  for a big DB, e.g. if replicating gigabytes of data, not so good
    slow to create and write entire DB to disk
  perhaps service data should live on disk in a B-Tree
    no need to explicitly snapshot, since on disk already
  dealing with lagging replicas is hard, though
    leader should save the log for a while
    or remember which parts of state have been updated

*** linearizability

client programmers need to know how the system can behave
  implementers need to know what designs/optimizations are OK
  we need a "consistency contract"
  
so far I've appealed informally to "act like a single server"
  that's OK for one client, one-at-a-time operations
  boils down to "if the server says it did an operation, then
    a subsequent client read should see it."
  but multiple concurrent clients mean "subsequent" is
    not well defined.
  e.g. if two clients write different values to the same
    DB record at the same time, which value should a
    subsequent read see?

"linearizability" is a common version of strong consistency
  similar to behavior expected of a single server
  can be implemented in a distributed system (at some expense)
  your Lab 3 key/value store will be linearizable

linearizability definition:
  an execution history is linearizable if
    one can find a total order of all operations,
    that matches real-time (for non-overlapping ops), and
    in which each read sees the value from the
    write preceding it in the order.

a history is a record of client operations, each with
  arguments, return value, time of start, time completed

example history 1:
  |-Wx1-| |-Wx2-|
    |---Rx2---|
      |-Rx1-|
the x-axis is real time
"Wx1" means "write value 1 to record x"
"Rx1" means "a read of record x yielded value 1"
clients send these operations (it doesn't matter if one or many clients)
  the |- is the time at which the client sends the request RPC
  the -| is the time at which the client gets a "yes" reply
  for Raft, these are the time of the first Start() call for an op,
    and the time at which Raft sends the committed op up the applyCh

is this history linearizable?
  can we find a total order of operations which satisifies the rules?
  draw the constraint arrows:
    value constraints (W -> R)
    real-time constraint (Wx1 -> Wx2)
  this order satisfies the constraints:
    Wx1 Rx1 Wx2 Rx2
  since there's a total order of the original concurrent history
    that satisfies the rules, the history is linearizable.

note: the definition is based on external behavior
  so we can apply it without having to know how service works
note: histories explicitly incorporate concurrency in the form of
  overlapping operations (ops don't occur at a point in time), thus good
  match for how distributed systems operate.

example history 2:
  |-Wx1-| |-Wx2-|
    |--Rx2--|
              |-Rx1-|
draw the constraint arrows:
  Wx1 before Wx2 (time)
  Wx2 before Rx2 (value)
  Rx2 before Rx1 (time)
  Rx1 before Wx2 (value)
there's a cycle -- so it cannot be turned into a linear order. so this
history is not linearizable. 

it would be linearizable w/o Rx2, even though Rx1 overlaps with Wx2.

review from last lecture:
  linearizability is the most strict consistency you'll see.
    it formalizes the behavior possible with a single one-at-a-time server.
    it's usually applied to client/server storage systems.
  linearizability is the behavior we're asking you for in Lab 3.
  linearizability is defined on concrete client-visible "histories".
  to show a history is linearizable, find a total (one-at-a-time)
    order that obeys any before/after and write->read values.
  to show not linearizable, show a cycle (neither can go first),
    or enumerate all order possibilities and show none are legal.

example history 3:
|--Wx0--|  |--Wx1--|
            |--Wx2--|
        |-Rx2-| |-Rx1-|
this may look non-linearizable because Wx2 looks
  like it comes after Wx1, but Rx2 comes before Rx1.
but this order shows it's linearizable: Wx0 Wx2 Rx2 Wx1 Rx1
so:
  the service can pick either order for concurrent writes.
  e.g. a key/value server handing concurrent ops to Raft.Start()
  the linear order can be different from start-time order!

example history 4:
|--Wx0--|  |--Wx1--|
            |--Wx2--|
C1:     |-Rx2-| |-Rx1-|
C2:     |-Rx1-| |-Rx2-|
can there be a total order?
  C1 needs Wx2 Rx2 Wx1 Rx1
  C2 needs Wx1 Rx1 Wx2 Rx2
  we can't have both Wx2 before Wx1, and Wx2 after Wx1.
  so not linearizable.
so:
  service can choose either order for concurrent writes
  but all clients must see the writes in the same order
  this is important when we have replicas or caches
    they have to all agree on the order in which operations occur

example history 5:
|-Wx1-|
        |-Wx2-|
                |-Rx1-|
can order include Wx2 Rx1?
  no: the read doesn't see the latest written value
can order include Rx1 Wx2?
  no: the order has to preserve order if one op ends before another starts
no order is possible -- not linearizable
so:
  reads must return fresh data: stale values aren't linearizable
  even if the reader doesn't know about the write
    the time rule requires reads to yield the latest data
  linearizability forbids many situations:
    split brain (two active leaders)
    forgetting committed writes after a reboot
    reading from lagging replicas

example history 6:
suppose clients re-send requests if they don't get a reply
in case it was the response that was lost:
  leader remembers client requests it has already seen
  if sees duplicate, replies with saved response from first execution
but this may yield a saved value that is now out of date!
what does linearizabilty say?
C1: |-Wx3-|          |-Wx4-|
C2:          |-Rx3-------------|
order: Wx3 Rx3 Wx4
so: returning the old saved value 3 is correct
    returning 4 would also be correct
this example might help you reason about Lab 3.

linearizability is desirable if you want to avoid ever seeing
  out-of-date data, or if you want atomic read-modify-write operations
  like append.

you'll appreciate the details more when we look at systems
  with less strict consistency.

You may find this page useful:
https://www.anishathalye.com/2017/06/04/testing-distributed-systems-for-linearizability/

*** duplicate RPC detection (Lab 3)

What should a client do if a Put or Get RPC times out?
  i.e. Call() returns false
  if server is dead, or request was dropped: re-send
  if server executed, but reply was lost: re-send is dangerous

problem:
  these two cases look the same to the client (no reply)
  if already executed, client still needs the result

idea: duplicate RPC detection
  let's have the k/v service detect duplicate client requests
  client picks a unique ID for each request, sends in RPC
    same ID in re-sends of same RPC
  k/v service maintains a "duplicate table" indexed by ID
  makes a table entry for each RPC
    after executing, record reply content in duplicate table
  if 2nd RPC arrives with the same ID, it's a duplicate
    generate reply from the value in the table

how does a new leader get the duplicate table?
  put ID in logged operations handed to Raft
  all replicas should update their duplicate tables as they execute
  so the information is already there if they become leader

if server crashes how does it restore its table?
  if no snapshots, replay of log will populate the table
  if snapshots, snapshot must contain a copy of the table

what if a duplicate request arrives before the original executes?
  could just call Start() (again)
  it will probably appear twice in the log (same client ID, same seq #)
  when cmd appears on applyCh, don't execute if table says already seen

idea to keep the duplicate table small
  one table entry per client, rather than one per RPC
  each client has only one RPC outstanding at a time
  each client numbers RPCs sequentially
  when server receives client RPC #10,
    it can forget about client's lower entries
    since this means client won't ever re-send older RPCs

some details:
  each client needs a unique client ID -- perhaps a 64-bit random number
  client sends client ID and seq # in every RPC
    repeats seq # if it re-sends
  duplicate table in k/v service indexed by client ID
    contains just seq #, and value if already executed
  RPC handler first checks table, only Start()s if seq # > table entry
  each log entry must include client ID, seq #
  when operation appears on applyCh
    update the seq # and value in the client's table entry
    wake up the waiting RPC handler (if any)

but wait!
  the k/v server is now returning old values from the duplicate table
  what if the reply value in the table is no longer up to date?
  is that OK?

example:
  C1           C2
  --           --
  put(x,10)
               first send of get(x), reply(10) dropped
  put(x,20)
               re-sends get(x), server gets 10 from table, not 20

what does linearizabilty say?
C1: |-Wx10-|          |-Wx20-|
C2:          |-Rx10-------------|
order: Wx10 Rx10 Wx20
so: returning the remembered value 10 is correct

*** read-only operations (end of Section 8)

Q: does the Raft leader have to commit read-only operations in
   the log before replying? e.g. Get(key)?

that is, could the leader respond immediately to a Get() using
  the current content of its key/value table?

A: no, not with the scheme in Figure 2 or in the labs.
   suppose S1 thinks it is the leader, and receives a Get(k).
   it might have recently lost an election, but not realize,
   due to lost network packets.
   the new leader, say S2, might have processed Put()s for the key,
   so that the value in S1's key/value table is stale.
   serving stale data is not linearizable; it's split-brain.
   
so: Figure 2 requires Get()s to be committed into the log.
    if the leader is able to commit a Get(), then (at that point
    in the log) it is still the leader. in the case of S1
    above, which unknowingly lost leadership, it won't be
    able to get the majority of positive AppendEntries replies
    required to commit the Get(), so it won't reply to the client.

but: many applications are read-heavy. committing Get()s
  takes time. is there any way to avoid commit
  for read-only operations? this is a huge consideration in
  practical systems.

idea: leases
  modify the Raft protocol as follows
  define a lease period, e.g. 5 seconds
  after each time the leader gets an AppendEntries majority,
    it is entitled to respond to read-only requests for
    a lease period without adding read-only requests
    to the log, i.e. without sending AppendEntries.
  a new leader cannot execute Put()s until previous lease period
    has expired
  so followers keep track of the last time they responded
    to an AppendEntries, and tell the new leader (in the
    RequestVote reply).
  result: faster read-only operations, still linearizable.

note: for the Labs, you should commit Get()s into the log;
      don't implement leases.

in practice, people are often (but not always) willing to live with stale
  data in return for higher performance
